TOPIS 2.0SpecificationsStatus: 04.09.2020Version: 3.0VersionDateAuthor (s)1.015.02.2016Sylvia Stähler2.008.12.2016Daniel Kaiser2.116.12.2016Sylvia Stähler2.104.01.2017Sylvia Stähler, Daniel Kaiser2.225.05.2018Daniel Kaiser3.004.09.2020Daniel KaiserCONTENT TOC \o "2-4" \h \z \t "Überschrift 1;1" 1Beschreibung der Anforderungen PAGEREF _Toc50474145 \h 31.1Graphische Darstellung des Hallen-/Lagerlayouts PAGEREF _Toc50474146 \h 31.1.1Zeichnung Hallenplan PAGEREF _Toc50474147 \h 31.1.1.1Grundriss, Außenwände PAGEREF _Toc50474148 \h 31.1.1.2Hallenausstattung, -einteilung (Innenfläche) PAGEREF _Toc50474149 \h 41.1.2Tore / Rampen PAGEREF _Toc50474150 \h 71.1.2.1Tore PAGEREF _Toc50474151 \h 71.1.2.2Rampen PAGEREF _Toc50474152 \h 81.1.3Nutzflächen PAGEREF _Toc50474153 \h 91.1.3.1Stell-/Relationsplatz PAGEREF _Toc50474154 \h 91.1.3.2Regale PAGEREF _Toc50474155 \h 111.1.3.3Sonder- und Klärplätze PAGEREF _Toc50474156 \h 111.1.3.4Individualobjekt PAGEREF _Toc50474157 \h 111.1.4Fahr- und Verteilwege PAGEREF _Toc50474158 \h 121.1.4.1Definition Wegbereiche PAGEREF _Toc50474159 \h 121.1.4.2Einzeichnung Fahr- und Verteilwege PAGEREF _Toc50474160 \h 121.1.4.3Automatische Wege-Darstellung und -Berechnung PAGEREF _Toc50474161 \h 131.1.4.4Berechnung des Zeitbedarfs je Weg PAGEREF _Toc50474162 \h 141.1.5Unterflurförderkette PAGEREF _Toc50474163 \h 151.1.6Außengelände PAGEREF _Toc50474164 \h 161.1.7Anforderungen an die Anzeige PAGEREF _Toc50474165 \h 16DESCRIPTION OF THE REQUIREMENTSThe description of the requirements is split up according to the application areas, which also correspond to the later application process:Drawing of the hall layout (floor plan, elements and properties)Functions and calculationsOutput and exportGeneral program requirementsGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION OF THE HALL / WAREHOUSE LAYOUTThe hall layout consists of the hall plan and the outdoor area. The presentation is two-dimensional, as a top view. In principle, several hall layouts can be drawn on one outdoor area or site plan. These hall layouts must be able to be clearly linked to the objects inserted later.The presentation of the hall plan is detailed, dimensioned, true to the architect, the outdoor area is less detailed.The basis is a dimensioned drawing area. The smallest unit is centimetres.The term coordinates used in the following refers to this drawing area. It must be possible for the objects to move the arrangement by entering the coordinates of a corner point or to move a single point.HALL PLAN DRAWINGfloor plan, exterior wallsThe hall can consist of one or more buildings. The total hall area per building is defined by the drawing of the outer walls or the floor plan. As soon as all outer walls are connected, the hall is available as a grouping of the outer walls. This should be indicated in the drawing area by a colour adjustment of the inner area. In addition, the grouped walls are displayed in an editor window in which the wall properties can also be adjusted.Properties of outer walls are:Part of a grouping (hall)Designation of the wallLength of the wall (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)depth of the wall (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)Wall height (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)Angle to adjacent walls (displayed in unit "°")This grouping of the entire hall can be given a name, e.g. "Terminal Hall 1".Two variants are available for the presentation of the floor plan.Variant 1: Selection of a floor plan from various standard types with adjustment of the outer wall lengths, the entered dimensions can be changed subsequently. I-Shape T-Shape L-ShapeThe dimensions can be adjusted either via the editor window or directly in the drawing area after marking the affected walls.It must be indicated in the drawing area which wall is currently being edited, e.g. by highlighting it in colour.Variant 2: Freehand drawing of the floor plan via individual drawing of the outer walls. Dimensions and walls must be changeable afterwards. Individual ShapeRequirements for freehand drawing: Walls can be drawn individually,shifted,assembledor deleted.Curves can be displayed.The angle can be adjusted when the walls bend.Changes of the wall properties are possible via the editor window or directly in the drawing area after marking the wall.The following applies across the board: it must be possible to display several individual floor plans in parallel (e.g. 3 halls on one site).HALL EQUIPMENT, PARTITIONING (INTERIOR SURFACE)The internal hall layout should reflect the conditions in the hall/warehouse as realistically as possible. Various standard drawing elements are available for this purpose. All elements have properties whose value is defined by standard values, but can also be changed individually. The standard elements are not marked separately, but can be seen by their appearance (stairs, door shown differently than the wall)Colour (256 colours palette)Dimensions (length, width, height), input in centimetres or metresAnchored (rigid/sliding)Waypoint (centre of the object can be used as a waypoint)Restrictions (in terms of positioning and interaction with other objects)Category (see 3.1.3)Individual elements or objects can be copied within the drawing. The properties of an element should be transferable to other elements (similar to Microsoft's Transfer Format).Required rigid objects :Interior wallsfreely drawable, freely positionable in hall area (only in the inner area of the grouped hall)Properties of interior walls:Length (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)depth (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)Height (unit: default "m", displayed to one decimal)Designation of the wallPart of a groupingAngle to adjoining interior or exterior wallsPosts/Pillarsfreely drawable, freely positionable in hall area (only in the inner area of the grouped hall)Properties of Posts/Pillars:Length (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)depth (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Height (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Designation of the wallPart of a groupingDoors on external wallsPositionable on external wallsProperties of doors on external walls:Length (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)depth (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Height (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Designation of the wallPart of a groupingLater marked paths may pass through doors.Doors on interior wallsPositionable on interior wallsProperties of doors on interior walls:Length (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)depth (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Height (unit: default "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Designation of the wallPart of a groupingLater marked paths may pass through doors.StaircasesPositionable in interior and exterior walls or officesThe list of available objects must be extended and it must be possible to add properties from a kind of construction kit. It must be possible to assign individual icons to the objects.It should be possible to draw the objects in the floor plan in two ways. Free positioning: The object is moved by drag&amp;drop to the intended position in the layout and can be moved here at any time.Positioning via coordinates: The position of the object is set. Either via a coordinate system or via distance information to the outer walls or corner points.GATES / RAMPSGates and ramps form the connection between the ground plan and the outdoor area. Gates are to be positioned on the outer walls, there is one variant of the ramps on the outside and one in the inner layout.The characteristics of the doors are to be defined in the same way as the hall layout (see 3.1.1.2). Gates and ramps can be the start and/or end points of paths.GATESDoors are positioned on the outer walls and are firmly fixed to the outer wall. This means that doors can only be positioned on external walls, not freely in the drawing area without contact with the wall.Doors have the following characteristics:Length (default: "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)depth (default: "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Height (default: "m", displayed with 1 decimal place)Designation/number: Text, max. 100 characters (numbering with pure numbers as well as letter-number-combinations or pure text is conceivable here)Part of a grouping (hall)Type: Text, max. 100 charactersPosition: distance between corner points ("S" and "E"), default in "m", displayed with 1 decimal placeCoordinates: Coordinates of the drawing area or hall planThe properties can be shown and hidden in the drawing area as a whole or individually. A distinction must be made between the digital working version and a print version.Default values can be stored for the properties, which can be adjusted by the user before or during the editing of a hall plan.For the area of evaluations, it must be possible to link the doors with other information:1 gate = 1 to n loader1 gate = 1 to n parking spaces1 gate = 1 to n vehicles1 gate = x colliThe goals are therefore related to various other data. These assignment possibilities and their relevance for the evaluations are explained in the respective section of the evaluations.Variants for the drawing of goals:Drag&amp;drop: The gates are dragged and dropped onto the outer walls. The position (distances to the corner points) and properties can be changed in the editor window. When adjusting the coordinates, make sure that the door is still integrated on the outer wall.Position or coordinate input: After selecting a wall, the doors can be positioned by entering the position (distance from point "S" or point "E") or by entering the coordinates. When entering the coordinates, make sure that the door remains integrated on the wall. "Multiple insertion" of the gates: It should be possible to place up to n gates on the wall. For this purpose, the following information is required in addition to the actual door properties:Choice of wallDistance to the corner point ("S" or "E")Number of gates to be inserted (integer)Distance between the gates (default in "m", 1 decimal place)Start value of numberingExamples for numbering:1, 2, 3, 4, 5 … nA1, A2, A3 … n1A, 1B, 1C … nA, B, C … ZIndividual gate properties or numbering can be changed per gate via the editor window.As a drawing element without function, the so-called levellers are to be provided optionally at the gates. The dock levellers are rectangular, with the width of the door and the length to be entered and are located in the inner layout directly in front of the door..RAMPSThe so-called local transport ramps are located on the outside of the hall floor plan. The length and width must be flexibly adjustable (for positioning see Gates).Properties of the ramps are:Length (default "m", 1 decimal place)depth (default "m", 1 decimal place)Height (default "m", 1 decimal place)Description (text, max. 100 characters)Position: distance between corner points ("S" and "E"), default in "m", displayed with 1 decimal placeCoordinates: Coordinates of the drawing area or hall planThe ramps can be used for paths or additional parking spaces can be added. Ramps are thus an integral part of the outdoor area, directly docked to the outer walls of the hall.FACILITIESParking and relational spaces as well as usable areas represent a special hall element. For the purpose of depositing the special requirements, these are divided into categories.Each category is assigned a specific symbol or colour, which is also shown in the display.Usable areas are usually rectangular, but must also be individually designable (angle &lt;&gt; 90 degrees, rounding).It must be possible to set all usable areas freely within the layout. The same applies here as free positioning by drag&amp;drop or the specification of coordinates. The dimensions of the individual spaces can be freely selected and displayed. All areas can be rotated by 1-359 degrees if required.POSITION/RELATIONAL PLACEA parking space ( in practice also referred to as a relational space) is arranged within the hall. The parking space must not lie on rigid objects such as walls, posts or doors.As a rule, the parking space is rectangular, but other individual shapes (circle, trapezium, etc.) are also possible. These different forms of pitches should be available as shapes, freehand drawing should also be possible.Characteristics of pitches are:Length (default "m", 1 decimal place)depth (default "m", 1 decimal place)angle (unit "°", 1 decimal place)Designation/number: Text, max. 100 characters (numbering with pure numbers as well as letter-number-combinations or pure text is conceivable here)Part of a grouping (hall)Type: Text, max. 100 charactersPosition: distance between two outer walls and their corner points ("S" and "E"), default in "m", displayed with 1 decimal placeCoordinates: Coordinates of the drawing area or hall planWaypoint: Marking whether a parking space can be the starting point and/or destination of a trailPath calculation: centre of the square (default setting) or freely selectable (then the clicked point in the drawing area is taken as start or end point)The properties of a parking space can be shown or hidden in the view either as a whole or individually (for screen display and print mode). The designation of the parking space can be shown on the hall plan, the designation text can be formatted (e.g. font size, bold).It must be possible to link parking spaces with various other data in order to enable appropriate evaluations at a later date:1 parking space is linked to up to n gates.1 parking space can be assigned to up to n relations and their quantitiesThese relations can be subdivided into areas.1 loading area can be assigned to the relations.Up to n vehicles can be assigned to the relations.1 parking space can be assigned a capacity. The capacity can be stored in different sizes:Capacity in packagesCapacity in loading meterCapacity in qmLater on, the pitch will offer display possibilities. For example, the filling level should be displayed in the form of a traffic light indicator (filling level = quantity in space / capacity). The colour distribution must be individually adaptable.RACKSRacks represent an extension of the storage/relational space, as they have 2-n levels. Each level represents a separate storage space in itself, whereby all the characteristics of the storage/relational spaces also apply to each level of the shelves.Additional characteristics of the shelving levels:DesignationLower edgeHeightPallet spacesThe designation of the shelf levels should be shown on the hall plan as required, irrespective of whether the shelf position designation is shown.SPECIAL AND PURIFICATION AREASSpecial and clarification areas are positioning/relational areas with extra symbols and standard display:Clarification centreRefusal of acceptance (AV)Surplus (ÜZ)Dangerous goodsbulky placeValue shift ("cage")Pallet warehouseCharging station, hall terminals etc.INDIVIDUAL OBJECTIt must be possible to insert a new, individual hall element. All existing properties can be used for this element (designation, representation, behaviour).TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION ROUTESPaths connect the hall elements and show the flow of goods through the hall. Paths can be walked on or driven on by various industrial trucks. Path areas must first be stored in TOPIS 2.0 before paths can be drawn manually or systematically. Only on defined path areas can distribution routes be stored later, or only these areas are taken into account in the calculation of route lengths.DEFINITION PATH AREASPath areas can be drawn in and thus defined in two ways:System-supported, full surfaceBasis: The system selects all open areas, i.e. areas of the floor plan not occupied by other hall elementsDefinition: The user selects areas that should not be available as a path by rectangular mouseover.Manual: The total travel area is added up by selecting different travel ranges. The path area is the sum of the individually selected path areas. The system automatically recognises areas that cannot be selected (which are occupied by other elements, for example) and does not include them. In both variants, the path range can be changed subsequently by adding or deselecting partial areas. It should also be possible to define partial areas by entering the coordinates.DRAWING OF TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION ROUTESPaths may only be drawn or deposited on the defined path areas. Paths may not lead over or pass through other elements. (Exceptions through a door in a wall.)Each path has a start and end point with any number of intermediate points that define the path sections.Start and end points for the routes and distribution routes can be the following elements:Gates/rampsUseful areas (storage/relational areas, unloading zone etc.)Starting point of a path:An element must be defined as the starting point of a path so that paths can be drawn from the element.The physical starting point for the path is by default the centre of the element, but can also be placed on the edges.End point of a path:An element must be defined as the end point of a path, so that paths can end there.The endpoint of the way is by default the centre of the element, but can also be placed on the edges.There are two possible procedures for depositing the paths:Click on the starting point, draw the path by clicking on the waypoints, click on the end point. Finally, enter the name of the way. If the path drawn by the user does not comply with the rules, a message is displayed and the path is not yet completed.Selection of start and end point, automated drawing by system (as shortest connection between start and end point without crossing other elements, only in the path area, oriented to the middle of the path), automated naming (from - to)The total length of the path is the sum of the distance between all waypoints. The path lengths must be displayed, selectable per section or in total.By selecting the start and end point, the path is linked to the selected elements. If the linked elements are moved, the path must be updated. Manually drawn paths are updated according to the rules of automatic paths.´AUTOMATIC ROUTE DISPLAY AND CALCULATIONIt should be possible to draw and calculate paths without having to draw them in the tool itself.Therefore a selection table with the possible start and end points of the ways shall be displayed. Similar to MS-filters, it should be possible to select all or single start and end points. For the selected combinations, the path is drawn and calculated, taking into account the conditions described above in variant 2.Example for selection and resulting combinations:Starting pointSelectionEnd pointSelectionA 1xB 1xA 2xB 2 A 3 B 3xA 4xB 4 A 5 B 5 A 6xB 6 A 7 B 7xA 8xB 8 A 9 B 9 Drawn and calculated pathsPath lengthA 1-&gt;B 1x mA 1-&gt;B 3x mA 1-&gt;B 7x mA 2-&gt;B 1x mA 2-&gt;B 3x mA 2-&gt;B 7x mA 4-&gt;B 1x mA 4-&gt;B 3x mA 4-&gt;B 7x mA 6-&gt;B 1x mA 6-&gt;B 3x mA 6-&gt;B 7x mA 8-&gt;B 1x mA 8-&gt;B 3x mA 8-&gt;B 7x mCALCULATION OF THE TIME REQUIRED PER ROUTEIndustrial trucks (e.g. forklift trucks, high-speed trucks, long forks) can be stored in a master data record for the corresponding hall. Speeds can be stored for these industrial trucks. Areas/clusters can be assigned to each industrial truck and speeds can be stored for each. N areas can be added for each industrial truck.(These areas/clusters are relevant for later evaluations such as the average distribution path or capacity calculations! Two typical clusters in the handling hall would be "grouped goods inwards" and "grouped goods outwards").An average time requirement should be shown for the routes, details for the individual industrial trucks should be accessible (e.g. by opening them). This display can be called up or displayed as a whole and separately for each area/cluster.Calculation: Calculation: ((share FFG 1 * distance) / speed FFG 1 + ... + (share FFG n * distance) / speed FFG n) -&gt; this calculation shows the pure travel timeFor the total time requirement, the time required for picking up and setting down the package must be addedDrawn from master data, can be overwritten for each routeTotal time required for distribution path = time pick up + pure travel time + time set downUNDERFLOOR CONVEYOR CHAINAn underfloor conveyor chain is used for the automatic transport of packages within a hall/warehouse. In TOPIS 2.0, the underfloor conveyor chain represents a special type of path.The path area for the underfloor conveyor chain is a separate path area with a fixed width, consisting of curves and straight lines. Normal path areas and the path area for the underfloor conveyor chain can overlap. Usable areas must not be allowed to enter the path area of the underfloor conveyor chain. In practice, the chain is drawn first, then the usable areas.The chain path runs centrally along the path area of the underfloor conveyor chain. It is special that this path only runs in one direction, the direction of flow must be adjustable and is shown on the hall plan.Another special feature is that any points along the underfloor conveyor chain can be defined as starting or end points for other routes. The paths that end or start on the chain are drawn manually and are excluded before the automatic update.The path calculation for the "chain path" is carried out from the end point of the first distribution path to the starting point of the second distribution path, taking into account the direction of flow.A "chain path" necessarily requires an upstream path (to the chain, end point in chain), as well as a downstream path (from the chain to another end point).outdoor areasIn addition to the floor plans for all hall buildings, further buildings, paths or objects on the outside area should be schematically drawable. The objects on the outside area can be coloured and marked.Analogous to the hall elements there are two calculable elements for the outdoor area:Tracks/roads (analogous to tracks and distribution routes)Saddle/swap body spaces (analogous to usable areas)(For details on the calculation see 3.3.3.2).REQUIREMENTS FOR THE NOTIFICATIONThe drawing of the floor plan must be scalable and scrollable. A zoom, also on partial areas, is required. In one part of the application, it should be possible to display and edit the properties of the selected object(s).Paths can be shown and hidden. In addition, it is possible to choose whether the path length is displayed in full or in part.In the case of usable areas, it is possible to choose for each type of usable area whether the designation is displayed.